---
layout: post
title: The Very Definition
excerpt: In which I make an unsupported and surprising assertion.
date: 2016-12-06 13:40:08 -0500
---
*Subject to edit.*

There's an idiom in English: "half-baked".  It refers to an assertion
supported by an argument or line of reasoning that is incomplete at
best and missing at worst.  The analogy is to some kind of baked good
that has not fully finished baking, so that it's unformed and gooey
inside.

In geek circles, there is a term (believed to have first been coined
by Isaac Asimov): "PBT".  It stands for "partially-baked theory".  In
other words, it may not be exactly *half*-baked, but the amount of
bakedness ranges from 0 to 1 ((\\(0 <= b < 1\\), where \\(b\\) refers
to the measure of bakedness).

Having established this terminology, I'd like to propose a PBT of my
own.

There are a lot of crazy theories on the Internet.  The Moon Landing
Hoax theory, the Chemtrails theory, the Illuminati/Hip-Hop Connection
theory, the MK Ultra/Project Monarch Sex-Traffic theory, the list goes
on.  (If any of those don't sound familiar, consider yourself lucky.)
One that's gotten a lot of attention lately is the "Pizzagate"
conspiracy: the "theory" that Comet Ping Pong, a pizza restaurant/ping
pong emporium/bar/live music venue in Washington, DC, is the epicenter
of a child sex trafficking ring with connections to John Podesta,
chairman of Hillary Clinton’s 2016 presidential campaign, and to
Clinton herself.  (See [this
article](http://www.spin.com/2016/12/what-is-pizzagate-the-insane-child-sex-conspiracy-theory-that-led-a-man-to-fire-a-rifle-in-a-restaurant-explanied/)
on the [Spin web site](http://www.spin.com/) for more info.)

Now, the theory is absurd on its face.  Any real investigation will
show (and has shown) that none of the claims has any basis in fact.
But even without any investigating, if you come across a headline
like "FBI Insider: Clinton Emails Linked To Political Pedophile Sex
Ring", virtual alarm bells should immediately go off in your rational
brain.  Certainly you should believe it without any proof.

But some people are doing just that.  Not only do they take the
stories at face value, they look for confirmation---and naturally find
it, in a classic example of [confirmation
bias](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Confirmation_bias).  The theory
becomes self-sustaining in their minds, and only grows bigger.

But they don't stop there.  If no evidence is found, that is taken as
evidence of a cover-up.  If evidence to the contrary is found, it's
evidence of a "false flag" effort.  If someone tries to dissuade them,
that person is obviously a "shill" paid by "them" to try to quash the
story.  If news media investigates and finds no proof, or even finds
something that disproves the theory completely, then they're obviously
"in on it."

In short, not only will nothing convince them that they are wrong, but
*everything* gets twisted into proving that they're *right*.

Hence, my PBT.  It comes in three parts:

1) A significant portion of the population is insane.

Despite popular belief, the definition of insanity has nothing to do
with trying the same thing over and over.  [Psychology
Today](https://www.psychologytoday.com/) has an [article on the
subject](https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/in-therapy/200907/the-definition-insanity-is) that
points out that "insanity" is a legal term and not a
mental health one.  The article quotes [law.com](http://www.law.com/)
as follows:

> *Insanity* n. mental illness of such a severe nature that a person
>  cannot distinguish fantasy from reality, cannot conduct her/his
>  affairs due to psychosis, or is subject to uncontrollable impulsive
>  behavior.

Part 1 of my PBT is that this applies to conspiracy-theory "nuts" to a
tee.  It seems clear that the line between fantasy and reality has
definitely become fuzzy for these people.  And [the recent 
"self-investigation" of Comet Ping-Pong by Edgar
Welch](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/local/wp/2016/12/04/d-c-police-respond-to-report-of-a-man-with-a-gun-at-comet-ping-pong-restaurant/?utm_term=.e03275620245)
shows that impulsive behavior can easily result.

(I would argue that "cannot conduct his/her affairs" is vague, and
leaves open the possibility of someone who conducts his or her affairs
quite well, but whose affairs have been markedly warped by his/her
beliefs.)

Now, for Part Two:

2) This portion of the population has *always* been insane.  We just
didn't hear from them.

It seems unlikely that these people only recently went off their
rockers.  So we are forced to conclude---however unsettling this idea
is---that people like these have always been with us.  They just
didn't have a platform to express their views (save for the occasional
crank letter to the editor).  And because insanity is inimical to
having a social life, and having social contacts is usually a
prerequisite for making money, few (if any) of the "insanitariat" were
able to afford to self-publish their views.  And even if they did,
they were unlikely to attract an audience beyond their local
geographic area.

But now, we have the Internet.  Conspiracy forums.  Online vanity
presses.  YouTube.  Facebook.  Twitter.  There are any number of ways
for someone to publish their views, not to tens of hundreds of people,
but millions, even billions.  And thanks to search engines, it's
easier than ever to search out people whose views reinforce your own.

[Rule 34](https://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=Rule%2034)
states "if it exists, there is porn of it".  I'd argue that there's a
Rule 34a: if it exists, there are conspiracy theories about it.

Hence, Part 3:

3) The Internet is making sure these people never become sane.

If you believe X, and everyone around you believes Y, you'll be under
significant social pressure to conform and eventually believe Y like
everyone else.  But thanks to the Internet, you're able to decide for
yourself who is "around you".  You can build yourself a virtual echo
chamber, where "everyone else" believes the same as you.  Worse, if
you start to have doubts, your echo-chamber social circle will being
you back into the (insane) fold, and you'll perform the same function
for everyone else.

So, to summarize: we have a significant portion of the human
population that is legally insane and not only is unlikely to become
sane, but is being actively discouraged from becoming sane.

And if that's not disturbing enough, consider a possible Part 4:

4) Nothing prevents these people from voting.


Click [here](https://goltz20707.mmert.org/) to go back to the home page.

