---
layout: post
title: The Plumbers of the Internet
excerpt: In which I analogize about my chosen profession.
date: 2016-02-26 16:15:00 -0400
---

If memory serves, I participated in "Take Your Child To Work Day"
(then known as "Take Your Son To Work Day") exactly once.  It went as
well as might be expected, considering how new my profession still
was, how little of it was comprehensible even to me, and how
spectacularly unexciting it was when compared to, say, a day in the
life of a fireman.

To ourselves--to others in what would only later be known as
"I.T."--it was a new and exciting world, filled with possibility.  We
sent arcane instructions to the machines on our desktops, and later on
others' desktops and in data centers whose exact locations were
unknown and access to which was carefully guarded by Byzantine
security, and those near and distant machines did our bidding.
Occasionally, of course, they did what we told them instead of what we
wanted, in a manner similar to that of the endlessly multiplying
brooms hauling buckets of water in "The Sorcerer's Apprentice" portion
of the movie *Fantasia*.  But the essence was that we spoke Commands
and they acted.

That was how it looked within our heads.  To those outside the cabal
of I.T. (or to a bored son watching his father at work) it was just a
bunch of oddly dressed, odd-looking people typing on keyboards and
staring intently at green or amber letters on a tiny black television.

That's the crux of the problem I'm trying to describe.  Like many
intellectual occupations--math professors, for example, I suppose, or
writers--all the action happens inside our heads.  But a math
professor can fill blackboards with arcane equations; and writers
write, producing short stories or novels or newspaper stories,
possibly to be published or printed.  In both cases, something
tangible.

Software, on the other hand, is inherently intangible.  Yes, you can
print it out, or write it down, but when that is done it ceases to be
functional.  It's dead.  To do anything interesting, it must be turned
into invisible, ungraspable symbols, stored in patterns of magnetic
force or as tiny electric charges that a single errant spark from a
woolen sweater would quickly wipe from existence.

Yes, you can see and touch a dektop computer.  And later, you could
and did (and do) touch smartphones, and tablets, and smart televisions
and cars with built-in navigation systems.  But these are all the
products of engineering.  I am not an engineer.  I deal in software,
and networks.

Networks rely on wires, and specialized computers to send signals
along those wires, but what makes them "networks" is the invisible,
intangible symbols transmitted and examined and routed on those wires
by those boxes.

(My apologies--I'm listening to an audiobook of *The Martian
Chronicles* as I type this, and I think Ray Bradbury's wonderful,
poetic, impossible prose is affecting mine.)

My point is, what I do is important--it keeps the world running--but
it's boring and mostly out of sight.  Like maintenance workers, or
janitors, or garbage collectors.  All the people who do invisible jobs
we never think about until no one is doing them.

I'm not a wizard.  I'm a plumber.


Click [here](https://goltz20707.mmert.org/) to go back to the home page.

