---
layout: post
title: Rant: Sysadminning Is Hard
excerpt: A rant: Despite popular belief, not everyone can do my job.
date: 2017-04-05 15:41:11 -0400
---

The science fiction writer Larry Niven used to assert that there was
something about a Cadillac that caused the driver's brain to rot.  He
or she came to believe that yes, the road *did* belong to them, and so
it didn't matter how badly they drove or how many traffic laws they
broke, that was their prerogative.

I'm starting to think a similar process is at work on the brains of
people who manage Cisco internet routers.

Now, a good sysadmin--Unix or Windows--will admit when they're out of
their area of expertise.  Likewise for application programmers, or
database administrators.  But for some reason, networking types
believe that once you know how to configure a Cisco device, you know
it all.  You can set up and maintain Unix boxes, you can write
programs, you can run a database, you name it.

I don't assert that this isn't true.  What I have trouble with are the
two implicit assumptions that go along with this belief:

1) Cisco admins believe they can do all of these things *well*, or at
least
2) No one can do them any better.

Why would anyone think this?  What is it about managing a network box
that makes you think you can take on everything in the entire IT
world?

Today I listened while a router jockey--who is also in charge of our
VPN devices and some Unix backup--explain that changing the size of a
filesystem is very, very difficult.  Sure it is--for *you*.  That's
because when *you* set up the system, *you* just created one giant
partition for everything, and you didn't bother setting up logical
volumes.  So yeah, on *your* system it's hard.  And when *your*
system's sole file system fills up, it will crash your box, taking
your mission-critical application with it.

The real solution is to design, plan, and implement a robust system.

The router-jockey solution is to set up multiple systems, so that when
one fails, you can swap it out.  Two (or more) systems at only twice
the price (or more)!

And then when one system fails, and the one they replace it with
doesn't work because they haven't bothered keeping it configured the
same as the active system, they'll create some half-assed, home-brewed
duplication system so that the primary and secondary systems are all
identical all of the time...so that when the primary's file system
fills up, it will crash all of the systems at once.

The "solution" then is to buy a bigger disk, of course.

Ever wonder why government IT spends so much money?  Because hiring
less experienced people is cheap in the short term but very, very
expensive in the long run.

Thanks for letting me rant.

Click [here](https://goltz20707.mmert.org/) to go back to the home page.

