---
layout: post
title: Bitcoin primer
excerpt: A brief primer on bitcoin.
date: 2017-04-20 16:51:00 -0400
---

There are plenty of "introduction to bitcoin" documents out there.
But I haven't posted in a while, and some people who know me might
like it if I explained it, and I didn't have anything else to do, so
here goes.

I've been through several versions of this, and each one ended up
going too deep into the weeds of cryptographic mathematics.  So here's
as succinct an intro as I think I can manage:

1. The best way to think of bitcoin is as a worldwide, virtual
bank.  Transactions ("A gives X bitcoin to B") are recorded in a big
public ledger.

2. Everything is done via "bitcoin addresses", which are like account
numbers.  They look like this: {% include bitcoin-addr.html %} (that's
one of mine).

3. You can have any number of bitcoin addresses.  Mathematically there
are a *lot* of them -- far more than the number of stars in the known
universe.  Many people use a new address for each transaction.

4. There's a private key corresponding to every address.  It looks
like this: 5HpHagT65TZzG1PH3CSu63k8DbpvD8s5ip4nEB3kEsreBF8or94.  It
**must** be kept private, because knowing it lets anyone spend the
bitcoin in the corresponding "account".  (This one is not mine.)

5. A bitcoin "wallet" is one or more addresses, plus (usually)
software to manage them.  They are sometimes online and sometimes just
in software on your computer.

6. I use Coinbase a lot.  It's an online wallet, plus stuff to let you
buy and sell bitcoin.  It's available as a
[website](https://www.coinbase.com/) and as iPhone and Android apps.

7. [Electrum](https://electrum.org/) is good too, although there's no
iPhone app.

8. Bitcoin prices can fluctuate a lot.  It's currently at $1,237.67
per bitcoin, and the price has gone up $130.83 (10.6%) in the last
month.  Next month it may go down.

9. Bitcoin can be subdivided to eight decimal points.  In other words,
you can send or spend as little as 0.000 000 01 bitcoin, worth about
$0.0000123767, or 1.2 thousandths of a percent.

10. Each transaction (sending or spending bitcoin) has a transaction
fee, because transactions need to be "processed" (verified) by the
network.  The fee is usually small, like 0.0002 bitcoin (currently
about 25 cents), although that can vary a lot.  The bigger fee you
pay, the faster your transaction will be verified.


Click [here](https://goltz20707.mmert.org/) to go back to the home page.

