---
layout: post
title: Bitcoin primer
excerpt: A brief primer on bitcoin.
date: 2017-04-16 16:14:16 -0400
---

There are plenty of "introduction to bitcoin" documents out there.
But I haven't posted in a while, and some people who know me might
like it if I explained it, and I didn't have anything else to do, so
here goes.

# A quick and hopefully accurate introduction to bitcoin

This is a quick introduction to bitcoin: how it works, what you need
to use it, and how to protect it.  This is *not* meant to be a
technical discussion on the inner workings of bitcoin or of blockchain
technology.  I leave that to much more detailed documents by more
knowledgeable people.

## Crash Course: Public Key Cryptography

Don't let the title scare you.  I'm going to talk briefly about
cryptography, or "crypto" ("encoding" and "decoding" secret messages),
then "public key" cryptography and why it's different.

It's not necessary to understand or even know about crypto to use
bitcoin, any more than you need to know that gasoline burns inside a
typical automobile engine.  But knowing about gasoline can help you
understand some of what happens under the hood, and knowing about
crypto can help you understand some of what happens "under the hood"
with bitcoin.

If you really don't want to know any of this, skip down to
"[Bitcoin Addresses](#bitcoin-addresses-public-and-private)" below.


### Cryptography

Cryptography (which we'll call "crypto" because typing twelve
characters over and over gets tiresome, even with macros) is basically
just various sets of techniques for creating secret messages and
making them un-secret again.

A first draft of this section got a little too far into the weeds, so
here's a simpler intro.  Crypto is basically a means of turning a
message ("ATTACK AT DAWN") and a key (13) into gibberish ("NGGNP XNGQN
JAKKK").  The message is *plaintext*, the key is the *key* (duh), and
the gibberish is the *ciphertext*.  Don't worry, there will not be a
quiz.

You can send the ciphertext via email or some other (relatively)
insecure communications channel, and arrange in advance to share the
key (maybe by whispering it or passing a note).

### Public key cryptography

One problem encountered in crypto is the problem of *key
distribution*.  There's only one key, and it has to be kept secret, or
it gives everything away.  And if you have a way of communicating the
key secretly, why not just send the entire message?

A new kind of crypto, *public key cryptography*, was secretly invented
in 1970, although it wasn't known to the public until about 1976.  In
public key crypto, there are two keys: a *public* key and a *private*
key.  You can tell anyone about the public key, even publish it, and
they can encrypt messages with it.  Those messages can only be
decrypted by the private key.

Conversely, you could "encrypt" a message with your private key.
Anyone could decrypt it, but only with your public key.  Since the
fact that it can only be decrypted with your public key means it must
have been encrypted with your private key, that means only you could
have written the message.  This (and related techniques) is known as a
*digital signature*.

## Bitcoin Addresses, Public and Private

Bitcoin technology uses a *blockchain* (we'll get to that below),
basically a public ledger of transactions.  A transaction basically
says "Person 1 (who has public key A) sends X amount of bitcoin to
Person 2 (who has public key B)".  The transaction is *signed* with
public key A, so it could only have come from Person 1, and it's
*encrypted* with public key B, so only Person 2 can "spend" the
bitcoin.

A bitcoin public key is called an *address*.  That's what you'd send
bitcoin to, if you wanted to send bitcoin. It looks like this:

> 1Xj85sCpV8jMYCW3hc2LVU3rEWq7Dhwzo

(That one is one of mine.)

Note that one person can have any number of public/private key pairs.
See "[Bitcoin Wallets](#bitcoin-wallets)" below.

## The Blockchain

The *blockchain* is the public ledger of transactions.  How it works
is complicated and beyond the scope of this primer, but basically
bitcoin "miners" use computing power to try to...you know what, never
mind.  Just know that people all over the world use spare computing
power to validate transactions, and earn bitcoin that way.

## Bitcoin Wallets

A bitcoin *wallet* is a collection of bitcoin addresses (public and
private keys).  

## A Typical Transaction

*emphasis*

[Link](http://url)

Now is the time for all good men to come to
the aid of their country. This is just a
regular paragraph.

The quick brown fox jumped over the lazy
dog's back.

### Header 3

> This is a blockquote.
> 
> This is the second paragraph in the blockquote.
>
> ## This is an H2 in a blockquote

Some of these words *are emphasized*.
Some of these words _are emphasized also_.

Use two asterisks for **strong emphasis**.
Or, if you prefer, __use two underscores instead__.

* Unordered list.
* Item 2.
* Item 3.

1. Ordered list.
2. This one is
   item two.
3. Item 3.

Click [here](https://goltz20707.mmert.org/) to go back to the home page.

